Welcome again to one of my just one words. I've chosen this time the difficult word redemption.
We hardly ever use the word ‘redeem’ or ‘redemption’. We can redeem a bond but this is a highly technical term. Bach’s oratorio The Messiah, has ‘I know that my redeemer liveth’ (which Cranmer took from both St. John’s Gospel ch.11 and the Book of Job ch.19).

That’s about it. That’s our knowledge and use of the word ’redemption’. Then perhaps we remember when John the Baptist was born to an aged mother and his father Zechariah was so happy he sang “ for He has visited and redeemed his people”, all because he got a new baby. In the eighteenth century the word was massively important. The government enforced the freeing of slaves in 1833 just after William Wilberforce had died.
But…

We, or our forefathers in the government, paid the slave owners back out of taxation money. They were recompensed as the slaves were redeemed. Some famous names were slave-owners too. Imagine that happening now when all adults have the vote. So what does the New Testament word ‘redemption’ mean? It is sounds so
technical. It is quite simply ‘freeing’. We can see something of this on police-chase programmes on T.V. The officer binds the hands of the suspect behind his back in handcuffs. Afterwards the hands are released as he is interviewed at the police station. This makes me wonder what symbol we could use instead of a cross or a crucifix to signal what redemption is. Those two words are so hackneyed. Could it be the image of a person holding up their arm with the handcuffs dangling from that one arm only? What are we freed from? It is after all a rich metaphor. The Hebrew word helps us. It is SHUV and means ‘return’ Because of that, the word redemption needs less of the context of a slave market and more of an owner saying with open arms, “You’re there. You’re now free. I’ve found you. Welcome home”.
What could that do to the translation that the R.S.V. has in Paul’s letter to Corinth? In 1 Corinthians ch.1 v. 30 instead of:-
“He is the source of your life in Christ Jesus whom God has made our redemption”
This could read - “through whom God has made us aware that we areforgiven. 

‘It’ is over. Come what may”