"Abide with me. Fast falls the eventide."
What a hymn! Football crowds know it well, and the groundswell of emotion fills the stadium. Henry Lyte wrote this hymn in 1847. It is over 150 years old. So, we must know this is a valuable word for everyone.

We also hear the same word at Christmas time, "There were shepherds in the same country abiding in the field, keeping watch over their flock by night." (Luke 2:8).

This is the translation produced and authorized in 1611, over 400 years ago. More recent translations have used other words. The N.I.V. (1985) has shepherds 'living,' and the R.S.V. (1968) has both 'remaining' and 'dwelling.' It is a very simple Greek word being translated here, meno, and through the connection with Latin maneo, it does appear in our 'remain.'

Back to the shepherds 'abiding in the field': The next verse in Luke, v.9, gives the surprise that makes v.8 very mundane: "And an angel of the Lord came near them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them, and they were filled with fear." What a shock for the shepherds! If we sanctify the shepherds, we fail to appreciate the shock.

John uses the word 'abide' a lot. It is in a way that is so rabbinic. He turns everything upside down. He inverts it. First, in ch.12, he gets us ready for the crucifixion with very strange words. No mention of the humiliation of the crucifixion. "The hour has come for the Son of Man to be glorified" (John 12:23).

Then, in the great sermon of chs. 13-17, the word 'abide' is offered. "I am in the Father, and the Father is in me ----- the Father abiding in me does the work" (John 14:10). "If you abide in me and my words abide in you, ask whatever you will and it shall be done for you" (John 15:7). "I in them, and thou in me, that they may become perfectly One ----and know----thou hast loved them as thou hast loved me" (John 17:23).

I hope you didn't feel that was all heavy going. But it is. So strange. It is almost John turning himself inside out and upside down to explain the fullness of what we now live in, i.e., "abide."

So how do we find words to describe such an overwhelming experience? Somehow descriptions of the ongoing story in the Bible have missed out on depicting a divine dance. Can I suggest that you imagine a circle of three people? The three are the FATHER, the SON, and the HOLY SPIRIT. Draw it in your mind - like 'ring o ring of roses.' We humans are the 'pocket full of posies' abiding in the middle of the dancing circle, surrounded by the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. After sneezing (it must have been the pollen?), we ALL fall down - in laughter at the sheer beauty of abiding in the divine.