There is a really horrible ghost story about a man who climbed up spiral stairs in a tower and having reached the top, started to come down again. He never made it! He is still descending now. The writer has frightened us with the horror of a never-ending going down, and down and down. Was it M.R. James who wrote this? Whether he did or didn't, the story has encapsulated a very primitive human fear. Maybe the only way the writer could lessen our pain was in blaming the man morally for what he found at the top of the tower.

There is an abyss in The Book of Revelation (Revelation 9:1). The abyss is bottomless. The fifth angel unlocks the well - presumably in the side of the abyss - and all sorts of nasties come out; locusts like hordes and there is even a named powerful King (v11).

M.R. James was deliberately trying to frighten us, but the visions we see in dreams are not like that. We can't deliberately arrange for them. They come to us. The Book of Revelation is a bit like that. So how do we interpret such visions? Are they in any way a description of something 'that is'? I have an old book of dream interpretation. It is the sort of book that says "to dream of a table means perhaps you are longing to be included round someone's table."

An analyst might then ask you "Who was there at the table?" That's one way of interpreting dreams. But the Book of Revelation was written so that people could grasp a meaning for things/events - an equivalence that was in line with their experience. In the turmoil of the Roman world in the first century AD/CE, it would have been reassuring to be offered a picture of how bad things were for the early church in the time of the emperor Nero's persecution.

We need to remember that 2000 years ago, the physical visual world was not as rich as our present day. We have the internet, T.V., illustrated books, films, as well as art galleries and advertising hoardings. But for the early church 'illustration' by words, rich metaphors and images were food for the soul.

We do have such rich imagery in children's fairy stories. The brothers Grimm collected these folk tales in which human experience was 'nailed' by exaggeration. The princess would never have felt the pea through so many mattresses, but a child being read to would at least know somewhere in life there was a possibility of not being hurt.

The Book of Revelation is often classified as apocalyptic writing. The word apocalypse is Greek, meaning 'opening up'. So one way of reading this book is to see it as "compelling imaginative participation on the part of the readers/ hearers. It finds its full meaning when it elicits emotions and feelings that can't be conceptualised" (Raymond E. Brown 1999; an Introduction to the New Testament).

We can't understand the Book of Revelation intellectually, but we can enter into it (the abyss) and share our fears. That's Raymond Brown's imaginative participation.