I hope that word does not put you off reading this 'Just One Word.' Do read on; you may get a surprise. The word ATONEMENT is problematic enough for us. Such words engaged medieval scholars - words like propitiation and conciliation - 'whoppers' of words.

Fear not. These English words are barely 500 years old, coined when the Greek New Testament was translated in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. The Hebrew and Greek words that are translated as ATONEMENT are much older. They belong to a time at least 3,500 years ago when the Temple was being designed. So I would just like to explain the history of the place where ATONEMENT was enacted.

It began with the making of the tabernacle, a marquee-like structure, a tent which was to house the ark of the covenant (i.e. agreement) containing the ten commandments which Moses had received on Mount Sinai, on his journey from Egypt to the promised land Israel.

King David, 500 years later, planned a permanent structure and his son Solomon built it in the new capital Jerusalem. This was the beginning of the temple.

The greatest day of the year in the temple was the day of ATONEMENT. On that day, the Great High Priest came out of the Holy of Holies, where the Ark was kept, and declared that forgiveness was given to everybody. Guilt was over. The Hebrew words for Atonement are YOM KIPPUR, which means 'day of covering.' Our guilt is covered over.

Jesus himself echoed this happening when he was on the cross. His last words were "it is over." In both situations, it was guilt and self-punishment that were finished with and 'over.'

It has taken many years for the Christian world to begin to see and trust the huge reversal happening here. Humans tend to think we offer gifts to the divine. Jesus, on the cross, somehow offered a huge change of mind - an alternative to an irascible, bad-tempered, needing-to-be-pleased, god. Most sacrificial systems in the world rely on us propitiating and bargaining with such a being.

It is now realized that the Hebrew occasion of the Day of Atonement was one mighty giving of nothing but love and acceptance. In Jesus becoming the Temple on the cross, a sense of guilt, once recognized, is now over.

The Greek word for atonement is hilasterion, from which we get our word 'hilarity.'

Maybe the Temple was full of laughter on the Day of Atonement, with great cries of 'Wow!'

(Note: I have added bold formatting to the years mentioned in the text, which are now formatted as Bible references according to the syntax provided.)