We used to say, “I’ll give you a call”. It meant a voice speaking on the telephone.
Now however we text people. The hand does the work in unspoken letters and
perhaps emojis. Is the word ‘call’ going to die out in a technological age?
It has such a long history. Its origin is straight from the Greek word kaleo.
We do use the word when we say “I will call upon Jim to speak now.” In that special
use its history shines out. That call is a bit out of the ordinary. And that is how it is
used by the Christian churches.
We say, “I felt a call to be ordained”, or “to serve abroad in the ministry”. In that use
there is a recognised training that follows this ‘call’. People are said to ‘rise up’ to the
ministry.
There are many stories in the Scriptures where people hear ‘calls’. Samuel did
(1Samuel ch.3). St. Paul did mightily. He was blinded as well. Others heard that call
to him when he did (Acts ch.9). Quite amazing!
So does this word have any extra special meaning that touches everyone?
I’d like to suggest that a better translation of THIS use of the Greek word for ‘call’ is
realisation. We get a touch of this in the phrase, “it dawned on me”.
And there is magic in that little word ‘it’. We go on to say “Oh, now I’ve got it”.
The experience is special – but not necessarily ‘churchy’. By saying “I’ve got it” we
are implying we have done something – if only receiving it.
I wonder if the words ‘got it’ are helping us see that it happens to us. This is a
moment when our life is changed, all undergoing an experience that is infinitely
precious, as new thoughts or paths are opened to us.
Perhaps this invites us to expand the use of this word ‘call’. Everyone can be ‘called’
at any moment. The penny drops. We realise how fear governs us. Everyone has a
‘got it’ experience in this realisation The situation takes on a new light.
There is a trend now to use the word ‘other’ in religious and ethical thinking. The
‘other’ (with a small ‘o’) is anyone who isn’t us. So every encounter is a meeting with
a-n-other. We may change according to another’s position. The word ‘other’ is also
used of the divine – this time with a capital ‘O’. So, whenever we ‘get’ something we
are receiving a ‘call’ from the other Other -and it may turn us upside down.

