Have you ever visited the Jewish ghetto in Prague? It is a small area with a sad history. During my visit, I was struck by the sight of the Ten Commandments written in Hebrew above a cupboard in the East Wall, where Christian churches typically have an altar. Each line began with the word "LO," which means "do not" in Hebrew. Line upon line of these commandments, ten in all, were depicted in such a stark and graphic manner. It was the first time I had seen the Ten Commandments written in Hebrew, and it left a lasting impression on me.

Jesus also joins in the discussion about the Ten Commandments when a lawyer asks him how he relates to the Law, the Torah, and the commandments. Instead of answering the question directly, Jesus asks the lawyer what they think. The lawyer responds with a summary of the Law, which contains the words that are commonly attributed to Jesus: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul and with all thy strength and with all thy mind, and thy neighbour as thyself" (Luke 10:27). Jesus does not directly reply to the question, but instead, he illustrates it with the story of the Good Samaritan, in which a non-Jew comes to the aid of a battered man while two strictly observant Jews walk by on the other side of the road in case they become "unclean" from the man's wounds.

However, there is a missing piece in the lawyer's summary of the Law. The lawyer's emphasis is on the obligation to God, but there is a deep reversal going on here. Jesus does not want to come across as "Mr. Know-it-all," so he tells a parable as his ironic answer. But if he had replied directly, he might have said, "Yes, you are right, but you can only do what you say if you know God first loves you and your neighbor." This is the huge reversal to our imaginations that this millennium heralds: God loves first. That is the only way we can love. It is not an obligation to love God and others, but rather a natural outflowing of the love that God has for us.
