I found a wonderful book in the Huddersfield junk market. It is called "The Tudor Regime" by Penry Williams and describes the anxiety in which kings and queens in Tudor times lived, always watching out for betrayal. Because of this, other people tended to keep their mouths shut. Sir Thomas More tried to do this with regard to Henry VIII. But he was finally imprisoned in the Tower for fifteen months and then betrayed by the "testimony" of one visitor. He was beheaded in 1535.

We don't live in such fear of "confessing" our loyalties now. But still, the human instinct is to keep your mouth shut in case...Yorkshire folk say "had yer gob."

The translation of a certain Greek word as "confess" is a bit out of kilter. It puts the word in the context of law courts or of gossip-mongering publicly. This Greek word is simply "homologeo." "Homo" means the same, and "logos" means word or thought. Thus it means to be consistent in our talking and thinking.

It is much more about us making up our minds. It is not really a relational word. It is more of a psychological one, i.e., finding an ending to any internal struggle we have. In other words, making our minds up and finding peace. It is a point of relaxation. "Now we know where we stand at least."

For John's first letter 1:9, the NRSV translation (1989) has "if we confess our sins, he who is faithful..." The King James version (1611) has the same except there is no word "who." Wycliffe, translating in 1388, has the word "acknowledge" instead of confess. "If we acknowledge our sins..." which is more private. It also hints at the underlying psychological momentum.

So, how can we translate "homologeo" today? Here is my attempt. I see it as a word describing an opening up of one's own mind, a very subtle, almost miraculous event. But, as you can see - I have had to use lots of words to try to capture the immediacy of the word "confess."

"As we manage to relax into knowing (confess) we are all caught up in messing things up (sin)."

An example would be turning against some people and not seeing what is happening. Then slowly realizing what we are doing.

It implies there is just a sublime risk-taking to let go of the mask we wear to face the world and to move to being with others who are instinctively wishing to do the same.
