The word 'confession' has been used in different spheres but apart from the Law it has been used mainly by Churches. It usually carries a huge weight.

Go into some churches and there can be a box-like structure with two entrances. There, people make regular 'confession' of their sins and receive the words "I release you but go and sin no more". So clearly the 'confession' had to do with remembering a sense of regret and guilt and then somehow being released from it followed by a warning from a priest, a fellow human being. People must have needed such a process and still do. One would think "How lovely to be free at that moment......until?"

The Jerusalem Bible (1984) follows the original King James (1611) in using the word 'profession', and that has its own associations.

But the Greek word translated in this way has a much larger context. It is homologion, homo means 'the same' and logion is from logos meaning word or mind. So it means 'of one mind', i.e. you have made your mind up and are sticking to it. Pure description with no underlying moral associations that come with 'confession' It is as if we are just saying "This is where I stand".

How could we translate homologion now? I would like to suggest that a translation 'persuasion' works better. Perhaps it is like a badge that can signify you belong to a particular group. So.... you stand still but declare you are "with them" - whoever they are.

The writer of the long letter to the Hebrews - whoever they were- begins ch.3 with this strange word homologion.

The R.S.V. translation of 1881 has

Here is a different translation 

"Therefore, holy brethren, who share

in a heavenly call consider Jesus the Apostle and High Priest of our confession."

"So my holy brothers who are already in the heavenly realm take a good look at the Apostle and High Priest of our persuasion, i.e. Jesus."

By this translation I hope I have helped to restore something of the 'alreadiness' of human belonging in heavenly realms. Distance from heaven is gone. It is as if a non-existent door is opened and we are being spoken to.