This word can give us the shivers. There is a long history of people being punished for disobedience. Dunces Cap for a start. The Naughty Corner. But beheading and burning at the stake as well. Banishment is the simplest punishment but exclusion can wound a person deeply. It is interesting to discover the Greek word used in the New Testament. The word is apeitho and best translated as ‘not trusting’, or a refusal to trust or give anyone a second chance. So its Greek meaning is an absence of trust, rather than refusal. The Latin word is even simpler. The ‘dis ‘means ‘not’, ‘ob-audio’ means ‘to hear’. So ‘disobaudio’ is a refusal to listen.

Do you know the nursery rhyme “Goosey, Goosey Gander”? The old man wouldn’t say his prayers, so they took him by the left leg and threw him down the stairs. Albert Jack in his book ‘Pop goes the weasel’ tells us that this is about a Catholic priest in the C16 who would not say the new Protestant prayers. I expect he got burnt as well, with people around saying “good riddance”. He had not obeyed the new rules so he was truly ‘outsided’. It must satisfy a deep urge in humans to find someone to take the blame.

It may surprise you to discover that the word Disobedience is never used in any of the four Gospels. Instead only a part of this word, audio is found. They are encouraging us to listen, audio, and listen and listen again. By listening we make ourselves ready for old ideas to be changed and new ideas given. So Disobedience is really a refusal to have our ideas changed. Picture, please, someone putting their hands over their ears. Luke, in his Gospel, uses the word for listen but our translations hide the beautiful simplicity of that. The R.S.V. has for Luke 18:9 “He also said this parable to some who trusted in themselves that they were righteous and despised others”. Here is another translation of the verse. “He spoke to illustrate what he was saying to those who seemed to trust only in themselves, in their opinions, and their keeping of Torah (Law) and as a result made others outsiders.” This seems a long way from how we use the word Disobedience, but the problem remains.

How do we quieten the voice of fear that prevents us from listening?

i.e. the real dis -ob - audience