Everyone, yes everyone, is caught up in perplexity. This is quite normal, and is what humans have to work with. We struggle to decide, to decide whether to say 'yes' or 'no'. It mostly happens below consciousness. We hardly notice it because we are busy doing it, bit by bit, second by second.

I mention this because it helps to explain the word ecstasy. When we are in ecstasy, we quieten down one of the partners or forces in human thinking and just go for the other. We can then say how lovely it is 'to be of one mind'.

Our word ecstasy is straight from the Greek word "ekstasis," used of something being put out of its place; and of the mind 'distraction'. It might be helpful to discover some of your personal means to achieve this ecstasy. Mine are gardening, soaking in a long bath, and reading. Reading takes me out of myself and engages me fully with other possibilities.

"But", you may be asking, "What about ecstasy achieved by drug-takers?" I haven't forgotten my one glass of wine every evening to take away the consequences of pain.

I know that addiction ruins people's lives. Addiction is the result of a desperate longing to be outside oneself - away from that perplexity.

Alcoholics Anonymous has a really beautiful reputation because it brings together people who have known ecstasy through drink and accepts them as they are. You, the addict, are given yourself back by the care of the whole group, care without hard judgment. That is the real 'being put out of place' or ecstasy. You are held by others who don't judge you because they too are being 'put out of place' away from judging each other.

Instead, they are being placed in a 'belonging' relationship with each other and thus receiving the gift of divine glory - without even knowing it.

The word ecstasy appears six times in the New Testament. It is translated as 'amazement', as 'astonishment', and as 'in a trance'. Only this last one gives a suggestion of something happening to you, not being done by you. You can be taken out of your single-mindedness that we call ourselves.