“Hold on Brenda,” you might say, “that word is not in the Bible”. Well, you would be wrong.
Its Greek origin might surprise you. ‘Electron’ means ‘amber’ which emits an electric charge
when rubbed by a feather. It is as late as 1767 that Benjamin Franklin discovered electricity
(without a piece of amber).
It is hard for us to imagine life before this: just candles and oil lamps and water or horse
power. And, as for storing this magic, invisible stuff in batteries it must have seemed beyond
belief. But it was the occasion for the invisibility of things in the world to be revealed and
found useful.

There’s another forgotten invisibility in the world which is much harder to appreciate. We
have nearly lost its context. The Hebrews discovered that the divine was a presence in our
world, and like naked electricity it was dangerous to get too near it. They called it, not a holy
place, but ‘The Holy of Holies’(in the temple in Jerusalem). No-one was allowed in except
the Great High Priest.
Remnants, echoes, still linger in the design of most church buildings, many of which have an
altar at the east end of the nave, approachable with something of a different, rare state of
mind. Is it Awe? We don’t talk about awe much now. So, has that sense become completely
lost?

I would like to suggest that we need to look in a different place. It happens all day long.
There are moments when another person makes a different, surprising connection with you
and it makes you glow. Something in you is ‘moved’ to be more than it was before.
Wordsworth said “My heart leaps up when I behold ---
I am talking about more than a rainbow – though that too is an interchange that to us is
invisible. Something of this is caught by the words “Lo” and “Behold”. Old fashioned words,
but what is the modern substitute? We might say “Oh Heck”, or just “Wow!”
All can be trusted to embody the invisible movement of the greater glory giving such
moments when life is made more extraordinary. It is the Holy of Holies present, like an
electric charge.
The very ordinary moment becomes as irradiated as the Holy of Holies.
