Oh dear, a really religious word, isn't it?
Well, not always.
We use the word to indicate that what we are saying is provable and genuine. We say "That's the gospel truth."
The word gospel is Old English and is a shortened form of 'god' = God and 'spel' = story.
In the N.T. the word we translate as gospel is euangelion and you can guess what the second part of the word means. An angel is an announcer. The Greek eu is well, or good, so an evangelist is an announcer of good things. We sing "Glad tidings we bring, to you and your kin" and we wish people a merry Christmas. That's another way of translating euangelion.
What else do we give at Christmas besides good tidings? Presents. The best presents are surprises but they can also be disconcerting. We think "Oh dear! What can she have given me now? Not another scarf - it feels like it!"
So may I suggest that we translate St. Paul's use of this word as 'strange news' - 'disconcerting' even.
In translating his letter to the people of Galatia (in modern Turkey) 1:11-12 The R.S.V. has
"For I would have you know, brethren, that the gospel which was preached by me is not man's gospel. For I did not receive it from man, nor was I taught it but it came through a revelation of Jesus Christ".
An alternative translation would read
"So my brothers, I want you to know that the strange news
that I landed on you
is not from human insight
not a specific person telling me
instead
it was a REVELATION
from Jesus the MESSIAH.
It must have been so hard for Paul to know he had heard Jesus the Messiah talking to him in a blaze of glory, on the road to Damascus (Acts ch9 vv3-6). How on earth was he to pass that on to people who had not had that experience? His only way is to keep reminding them and contrasting the before - Damascus Road -time with the post-Damascus Road-time.
So I suggest a translation of the word gospel as 'shocking news' to describe the major effect his new knowing has on people. They pass from darkness into light into the blaze of glory. Shocking?