Holy Moses! That's just one of the things we say when a surprise hits us. But how else do we use this strange word 'holy'?

The back story, the clue, is in another phrase we use: "What on earth do you mean?" We want everything to be well and truly 'earthed' as well as our electricity. So is holy just a word that is a bit sanctimonious? It is, in fact, from the Old English word 'halig' meaning 'made whole' and has a long history.

What I would like to suggest is that the long and sometimes troubled history gives us a clue. The word holy is like a meteor spreading behind it something almost dangerous.

The most sacred place for Jews was in the Temple, in a curtained-off place they called the Holy of Holies. It was not to be entered by anyone except the Great High Priest, dressed all in white. This area was regarded as representing time and space, inaccessible to humans who are 'of the earth." The High Priest would emerge from this area, the most 'holy' place, on the Day of Atonement with his face shining with light and speak to his people. He would declare that the sort of failures that humans suffer from are over; they are 'let go of'.

Why, you may ask, have we lost this sort of marvelous day? Can't we have somewhere we all go to see what holiness feels like - its thickness, its density? The answer is that it would be too risky. We would be blasted by the beauty of such holiness. The Old and New Testaments use a special word for this holiness. They call it 'glory'.

St. John uses the word light to describe this glory. In his time, the Temple has gone, destroyed about twenty years earlier by the Roman occupiers. What St. John writes about is how Jesus became the Holy of Holies, its full content, and that we are sharers, participants, 'great high priests' in that glory.

Look at how St. Paul describes the people at Corinth as holy (1 Corinthians 1:1-3): "We have been gifted to encounter the Holy One, who is forever with us." For him, it's not just a once a year job; for the early Christians, it is here and it is now.

How do we experience this today without knowing this back story? Perhaps it is that we can encounter the holy in everyone we meet.

Holiness then isn't something special, an add-on. It is more akin to occasions when we have our preconceptions of people taken away, leaving us gasping with surprise at the sheer beauty of how they are living with their pain. Our eyes are momentarily open to their glory, their holiness, their radiance and the holiness between us.