It must have been so hard trying to live before the time of the Welfare State, which was set up in the 1940s. "Council houses" were built, and their rent was subsidized. Before that time, finding a house was a dodgy business. Landlords sometimes found their tenants had done a "moonlight flit," meaning they had left in the middle of the night, owing lots of rent. Canny? Yes, but times were insecure, and renting a house still is. Problems with tenants are still common. TV has programs showing how agents get rid of non-paying bad tenants.

The doorway to a house could be said to be a fraught place. The Hebrews in Egypt 3500 years ago had to leave their homes in a hurry. Moses was told to prepare them for such a "flit." Firstly, they had to prepare for their flight (Exodus) by gathering just flour and water to make unleavened bread, with no yeast. They were in a hurry. Secondly, they had to eat the meal of a lamb, having first marked three parts of their doorway with the lamb's blood. In this way, we are told the angel of death would pass by their house in peace. This event is commemorated as the Passover (Exodus 12:21).

From then on, the Hebrews had no home. They wandered for 40 years. Poor old Moses never got to go into the promised land, now Israel. So, like modern emigrants, the Hebrews had no settled home. Ostracism of Hebrews/Jews continued for centuries called pogroms - all starting after the Romans had destroyed the Temple around 70 A.D.

Consciousness of homelessness is not focused on by churches today. Poor Ukrainians, escaping from their land and becoming immigrants into the rest of Europe, have raised awareness. We see homeless people begging in the streets, and the council tries to rehouse them. Having a fixed, settled home is still perilous. All very sad. Church people perhaps should be reminded that nowhere is really home. Do we actually diminish people who don't come to church as "rudderless" - i.e., homeless - and as "beyond the pale" - i.e., outside the communal home? (Pales were railings around an enclosure.)

Self-satisfaction is as poisonous as its opposite - guilt. In the New Testament, both Matthew and Luke remember Jesus saying, "I have nowhere to lay my head" (Matthew 8:19-20).

Perhaps homelessness is the ultimate risk of trust, and as T.S. Eliot says in "The Waste Land," the place "where we have been quickened."
