Have you heard about the room in a house that you couldn't go into? No, not a joke. It was real. Nor is it part of a fairy story involving Bluebeard. Nor is it a room in the safest of bank vaults that even 007 could not get into. Another clue needed? It was dangerous to enter it.

You may have realized that I was referring to the innermost part of the ancient Temple in Jerusalem, often called 'the house of the Lord'. In the inner parts of this huge building was the most Holy of Holies - a room barely 3 yards square, in which rested the golden ark or box made by the people that Moses led away from Egypt. In the ark were the two stone 'tablets' of the rules that God wanted his people to follow in order to live good lives and belong.

But no one, except the High Priest, was allowed to enter this room, nor even go too near it. The danger of entering it was that of ceasing to exist. The place represented the passage between 'what is' and 'what is not'.

Difficult this. In fact, almost impossible to describe 2000 years later. It was destroyed by the Romans in AD 70. We live in a practical universe, accessible by our five senses. Modern scientific advances, however, still use metaphors to describe 'reality' as best we can. So why on earth was Moses impelled to build this strange room 3500 years ago?

The Hebrew nation had two special inklings: a) that there is a power that is beyond words and images and b) that there are hints, glimpses of this power's existence to give us a clue about its amazing dynamic. They are: fire, cloud, burning, darkening, lightning, radiance, emptiness, etc... So awesome that people who caught a glimpse of it got both burnt and blinded, e.g., Isaiah 6:1-7 and Acts 9:1-9 for Isaiah and St. Paul.

The really strange thing is that 3500 years later the vestiges of this pattern still exist - but only just. Most religious buildings - Protestant, Catholic, Jewish, and also Hindu, Sikh, and Muslim - have a special place that is somehow more sacred than the place where you enter the building.

That is why I am talking about this home/house now. It exists here on British soil in nearly every village. It exists as the altar at the east end of the building - facing Jerusalem.

What we are in danger of losing is the sense of awe when we approach that east-end altar. There is something so beautiful that it is beyond our ken - a home of wonder that is in danger of losing its significance. But it is still there.