I have just been listening to one of James Alison’s podcasts on St. Luke’s Gospel chapter 12. It is the passage describing three events in which a person goes against normal patterns of behaviour. A sheep is lost : A special coin is lost : A son is lost In all of these James helps us see the joy of going for the ‘lost one’ despite incurring embarrassment. The searchers take that humiliation on the chin.

I would just like to write a bit further about the whirl of emotion that wells up when such situations occur. If we had been present on any of these three occasions our reaction would have been a mixture of irritation, embarrassment and humiliation. We would not have seen the beauty of the joy felt by the searchers. The story disturbs our world of convention and belonging. A central theme in the New Testament is to show how lowliness and accepting shame is the position we are put in by the Holy Spirit (the divine wind that blows us all over the place.) What we want is power and authority, things being ‘just so’ never changing.

Here are a few passages from the New Testament which help us see the three parables are about choosing the way of embarrassment as necessary if we want the freedom and joy that Luke talks about in those parables. Matthew 11:29, says“I am lowly in heart: (be that) and you will find rest for your souls.” Paul has ( Romans 12:16) “Do not be haughty. Instead associate with the lowly. Never be conceited.” Luke has the story of Philip talking with an Ethiopian. They read the words of Isaiah about a coming Messiah. “He was oppressed but he humbled himself and opened not his mouth. As a lamb that is led to the slaughter. By oppression and judgement he was taken away. (Isaiah 53:74; Acts 8:35)

What a shock for the Ethiopian to be told it is all about losing face in front of the world. What a shock it is for us. Dicken’s character of being ‘ever so humble’ is the opposite of this shock. That character wears it like a badge. It is not easy to find we are humiliated and forgotten.