We don't think twice about the whole experience of hearing, of listening to other people. Another person is exactly that - other to oneself. But our heads and hearts can get in the way. They are so full of preconceptions as is sadly being shown in the 'black lives matter' movement. Also, our minds carry our agenda. We may be thinking "I've forgotten to buy some potatoes" while ostensibly listening to someone else.

There are other reasons we are unable to really listen to someone else; perhaps it makes us uncomfortable, or maybe we are thinking "I want that person to get over that problem, so I will suggest an alternative to their worries".

These last two centuries have seen the growth of a form of listening in the burgeoning of psycho-therapeutic practice. The first discovery was to let the other person talk without the listener's agenda interfering. That takes some practice, as we long to add encouragement etc. The second discovery was finding the appropriate moment to respond, without altering the train of thought of the person being listened to. Oh, how hard that is! This goes against all our instincts to care and help. No wonder there is a need for professional training.

These forms of listening introduced to us the difference between listening to someone and listening with someone.

Why am I talking about this? Two of the key words in the Bible are 'hear' and 'listen'. "Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God" (Deuteronomy 6:4).

Jews have, for centuries, avoided speaking God's name. We blithely say Yaweh (as the Jerusalem Bible does) or Jehovah (as the 19th century did, and Jehovah's Witnesses still do). Both these words denote the sacred name YHWH with vowels added in. Instead, Jews quietly whisper the word NAME. The word YHWH is too sacred to utter.

In Hebrew, the word for name is shem. The word shema also means listen or hear. The Hebrew for the words "Hear O Israel" is "shema Israel". They know that fundamentally God listens. By "shema Israel," Jews mean "May we enter the profound silence that is the real intense glory of the divine." They are asking to learn the other form of listening, where we abandon chatter and interruptions and enter the glory of the listening - the glory of God.
