Old-fashioned words, these! We don't use them in ordinary speech. I don't say "Lo and behold, the squirrel is after my tulip bulbs again!" We would simply say, "Look at him again!"

However, we do encounter one or the other of these words in poetry. For example, in Wordsworth's 1802 poem "My heart leaps up when I behold A rainbow in the sky."

Perhaps we encounter the Latin version of these words when we see the words "Ecce Homo" on a book or on a cross. The translation is "Behold the man."

The Greek word translated in this way is "ide," and it is part of the verb meaning "look or see." By the way, the word "lo" is just a shortened version of the word "look."

The problem is whether to use a more modern word in biblical translations of "ide." The Jerusalem Bible uses the word "look" when John the Baptist sees Jesus (John 1:29), he says "look." Later in verse 4, he says, "I have seen." What this translation lacks is the charge that the old English words carry. We have lost a certain resonance. That meeting with Jesus is not of a similar sort as when I see a squirrel digging up my tulips. The full charge of such a meeting would have been "aghast-ness," being overcome. We could even say "gob-smacked."

The Old and New Testaments describe events when people were both "gob-smacked" and "eye-smacked." Moses sees the burning bush and hides his face (Exodus 3:2). Isaiah experiences burning lips and is aghast (Isaiah 6:6). Paul is blinded by the light on the Damascus road (Acts 9:3). Jesus blazes with glory at his baptism (John 1:33) – there is so much more here than the approach of the "dove."

So perhaps there is a need to retain the word "behold." How else do we find a word that retains that sense of glory? Perhaps the old Yorkshire "blooming heck" is nearer to it. The 14th-century word "behold" is perhaps the best we can do to get that sense of being blasted, captured, emptied by glory. All we can do is behold it.

The Anglo-Saxon word used in this context, "be-held-en," makes God the active agent. So when in the carol "Come, let us behold him," it is an invitation to look and ponder, it is also an invitation to be held in utter safety.