Have you ever received or bought oil for its perfume or healing qualities? It has become quite an accepted practice to put oil on oneself. Bathroom cupboards are full of little bottles of fragranced oil, such as lavender. Before the use of soap and proper water supplies, humans needed something to cover up smells. One use of oil enhances, the other one covers up.

I am describing this because the Greek word for 'anoint' in the New Testament is christos, and the Hebrew word is messiah. Both have the meaning 'anointed one'. The Hebrew word can also mean ointment.

At least 3000 years ago, the Hebrew people felt a real need to offer something to God: something that gave off a sweet smell and perfumed smoke. First, the oil was made from myrrh, cinnamon, scented reed, cassia, and olive oil. Then parts of the Temple were smeared with oil. Only then did the High Priest (originally Aaron, Moses' brother) get smeared with oil.

The oil was considered 'holy' or 'sacred' and even dangerous for its special set-apart-ness. Anyone trying to make such oil for themselves was cast out, outlawed. (Exodus 30:2) "All very interesting," you may be saying, "but what did an 'anointed one,' a Messiah actually do?"

A quick answer is that he became more than himself. He became special and to be revered. Our constitution pays due reverence to our Queen, who was anointed as Queen at her coronation. 

"What about us though?" The woman talking to Jesus at the well might help here. She says: "I know that when the Messiah is coming (he who is called Christ), when he comes, he will show us all things" (RSV. John 4:25). Jesus replies, "I who speak to you, am HE.”

Jesus the Messiah, the anointed one, has shown all things. He opened up the fullness of the heavens and earth. They are lit up with the majesty of the divine. That's Messiah's job.

We read in Psalm 104 that 'He is clothed in majesty and splendor. Wearing the light as a robe. You stretch out the heavens like a tent.'

The Messiah has access to such an amazing place, and we too dare to believe we can belong in this heavenly tent. Try reading the Song of Songs in the Older Testament for a glimpse of what it is like now.

We sing a hymn that is famous. But perhaps we don't realize it is about the Messiah.

"Hail to the Lord's anointed
Great David's greater son...
He comes....to set the captive free"
(James Montgomery b. 1771 Sheffield)