As you read this word, what is your reaction? I had a difficult moment recently when two Jehovah's Witnesses came into my garden. They felt they had a mission to tell me something. And, that they had been 'sent' to do that. That word 'sent' is what the word mission means as it is derived from the Latin word 'missum' - part of the verb 'to send' and is found in the early translation of the New Testament. We have come to think that it involves us in being 'sent' taking something to those who have not yet 'got it'.

I had to send my two visitors away as I felt talked to and not listened to. St. Mark has Jesus sending disciples out, two by two and without money or food (Mark 6:7). But we are not told whether they had a task as well as being sent out. We have presumed they had and so nowadays missions are planned and prepared for.

However, let us imagine there was no specific task implied. Those whom Jesus sent were then virtually naked in some way. They were perhaps working it out as they went, not quite realizing the implications of someone rising from death. Just sheer shock and puzzlement. So this might draw others to them to assist their confusion. Perhaps that is exactly where we are 2000 years later. It is the person who is not us that appreciates the struggle. Their care for us, when we are in a confused state is their reception of our never-ending puzzle to understand which may then help us to write it all down - strange as it seems.

Mission, then, involves not knowing and staying vulnerable and receptive to another person. Here are two examples in the New Testament of the original Greek word 'pempo,' which is also translated as 'send' (Luke 7:19):

"And John the Baptist called to him two of his disciples and sent them to the Lord, saying, 'Are you the one who is to come? Or shall we look for another?'" An outrageously brave question!

St. John has God doing the sending, and it includes a gift: "If I do not go away, the defence lawyer (paraclete) will not come to you; but if I go, I will send him to you" (John 16:7). We are sent something amazing to fill with glory that emptiness with which we are sent out. Nor is it competitive. Thank goodness we can be empty - or we might miss this gift.