There was a T.V. documentary about the inside life of a huge IKEA store. We saw the designers at work. One moment stands out for me. One maker stands out for me. She picked up a straight-sided ceramic vase. After a while she knew it needed changing. So she poked one of the sides in; she was amazed at the change. However, when she went to China to have the vase made in multiples the management and the workers could not understand its strange beauty. It took a lot of persuading for this vase to be put into production because each one needed some human pressure to make the dent. I think this shows how humans love order and symmetry and ......perfection in a product.

Perhaps a liking for imperfection is a Western trend? We talk about "distressed furniture". Muslims would endorse this view. To them only Allah is perfect and complete. Eastern carpets are always woven with a fault somewhere in them.

"What" you may be thinking, "has this to do with translating the New Testament?" If we remember when the King James Bible (1611) was 'perfected', it came out of a deeply moralistic society. Who is 'in the right' it asked?

The Greek word telos was translated as 'perfect'. Whereas its first meaning 'end' implies space and time - not a moral connotation. We have many words starting with 'tel' e.g. telephone -no right or wrong in that word. (The Hebrew word for 'end' is shlm which can also mean 'peace'.)

So much is missing from our use of the word 'perfect' when translating telos. Here is an example of a translation made around 1980 which honours humans who make mistakes, but in the second half falls into moralising.

"In love there is no room for fear, but perfect love drives out fear" (1 John ch. 4 v.18) There is no freedom from fear offered in the second half of this verse.

I would like to suggest that we translate the word telos as the summation of love - something we can grasp now, and look forward to more of each day.

Another translation avoiding the word 'perfect' would read,

"In love there is no room for fear, but endless, overwhelming love drives out fear."

Not however our love. It is God's love of us.