I hope you can stay with me while I first trace this word PRIEST on its journey through different languages.

Around 500 BC, the temple was where the SADDUCEES performed rituals that declared people righteous. This ceremony has continued in every liturgy throughout the ages (i.e., confession, absolution, declared righteous).

SADDUCEE is written in Hebrew without vowels Z D Q, which becomes ZEDEK, the word for Righteous.

Around 200 BC, these ZEDEK (righteous) elders became known by the Greek word PRESBUTEROI.

From this Greek word, PRESBUTEROS, is derived the English word PRIEST. So, a priest exercises religious authority for getting it RIGHT.

The repercussions of the history of this word PRIEST are assumed without question. Church liturgy seeks to aid us in being Zedek, i.e., to 'get it right' with God. That’s a priest’s job. We thus need to admit our failings and say sorry in order for the blame to be removed.

Oh, what a tangled web we weave!

From the time of the Sadducees, ritual has existed to pronounce release for those who admit (confess) their failings. Release was a gift of being seen as ‘right’ again = righteous. Quite an amazing insight into how humans need release from their sense of guilt.

But the whole edifice comes tumbling down at the crucifixion and resurrection. The naked ‘Son of God’ turned upside down our dramas of obtaining a clear conscience. He said, “I desire mercy, not sacrifice. I have come not to call righteous people (i.e., those who wanted to work at feeling right again) but sinners (those who accept their convoluted human natures)” Matthew 9:13.

In this acceptance, they catch a glimpse of the rays of glory from someone whose eyes carry no blame.

Again, St. Paul was somewhat devastated when he ‘got this’. It blinded him. He said, “The righteousness of God has been realized beyond the Law (Torah). All are seen as righteous by his grace as a gift” (Romans 3:21-24).

We are, then, all OK in the eyes of the divine.

The priest’s job thus becomes the task of telling us “it is all over”. There is no contract with the divine.

So, we are all priests to each other, mediating a blame-free regard. And, amazingly receiving it from another person when they catch a glimpse of this reversal.