The word "redemption" is not commonly used in everyday language. We might only hear it when discussing bonds, a highly technical term. Bach’s oratorio The Messiah famously includes the line "I know that my redeemer liveth" (which Cranmer took from both St. John’s Gospel, chapter 11 and the Book of Job, chapter 19).

That’s about it. Our understanding of the word "redemption" is limited. However, in the eighteenth century, it was a massively important term. The government enforced the freeing of slaves in 1833 just after William Wilberforce had died. But, the government compensated slave owners with taxation money. They were recompensed as the slaves were redeemed. Some famous names were slave owners too. It's hard to imagine this happening now when all adults have the right to vote.

So, what does the New Testament word "redemption" mean? It sounds technical, but it's quite simply "freeing". We can see something of this on police-chase programs on TV. An officer binds the hands of a suspect behind their back with handcuffs. Later, the officer removes the handcuffs when the suspect is interviewed at the police station. This makes me wonder what symbol we could use instead of a cross or a crucifix to represent redemption. Those two symbols have become overused. Could it be the image of a person holding up their arm with the handcuffs dangling from that one arm only?

What are we freed from? It is, after all, a rich metaphor. The Hebrew word helps us. It is "SHUV" and means "return". Because of that, the word "redemption" needs less of the context of a slave market and more of an owner saying with open arms, "You're there. You're now free. I've found you. Welcome home".

What could that do to the translation that the R.S.V. has in Paul's letter to Corinth? In 1 Corinthians, chapter 1, verse 30, instead of "He is the source of your life in Christ Jesus whom God has made our redemption," it could read, "through whom God has made us aware that we are forgiven. 'It' is over. Come what may."

