I had not expected this word to have its equivalent in Greek in the New Testament. But instead it has turned out to be a real find. Think handcuffs. What? Yes, the Latin word religare can mean to bind. So how does this help? There are so many religion-s in the world. What seems to be involved is belonging and being part of a group. ‘Being part’ can mean ‘toeing the party line’-perhaps not having properly explored what you are ‘signing up to.’ But, the beauty of being a member of something is that it reinforces your identity ( Latin idem means ’the same’) and gives you a name. The amusing thing is that we can’t escape it. If we refuse to belong we find ourselves unwittingly seeking out other non-belongers and it all starts again. ”Come and join us -the non-belongers”

So how does the New Testament help us with this word? It is rare, only appearing four times in the whole of the New Testament. The Greek word is threskia and is used of religion in its external form. Some of you might just remember having to wear best clothes and a hat to go to church. We would then be seen as religious externally. Here is what St. James says in his letter. He is addressing the issue head on. I have retranslated parts of James 1:26. “If anyone thinks he is religious and can’t but be caught up in rivalrous gossip and closing his heart to another person. This man’s religion is vanity – outward show. Religion that is pure and properly religious because of your belonging to God (and remember he’s your father) is like this -----” There follows a list of actions that in no sense whatsoever could be called religious – but we assume they are. We’ve messed this up as well – all with the best intentions. Faiths have pioneered change and growth and manifestations of love – but in the name of ----.

St. James is, I think, saying; you don’t need to belong to anything or group or philosophy of life – especially when it makes you feel worthy and, let’s admit it, superior. Just respond, knowing your being has been created and then captured by the divine. That’s your belonging, lonely as it may seem humanly speaking. A real belonging that we can begin to abandon ourselves to.