I've had an idea that could make me a fortune. Well, yes, but it is a very strange one. I could make an "atmosphere-ometer." What would that be for? What would it look like? It would be a device that you could hang around your neck, which would measure the atmosphere in any situation between people. You may be just watching people or wanting to participate in some way.

I am writing about this as I am of so great an age that I can sense that I am somewhat invisible. It is wonderfully freeing.

Let me tell you of an incident that happened recently. I was on the way to take boxes of books to a charity book-shop. As I can't carry them, I went in to ask for help. A serious man at the till said, "I'm on the till," and turned to another man who said, "I can't as I've got a bad back."

My atmosphere-ometer pinged at this belligerent stalemate. "There's only one way out of this," it signaled, "humor and folly."

I don't mind appearing silly. Time for me is too short for stalemates to exist with all the unsolved resentments. So I could joke and show vulnerability, and the atmosphere in that shop changed. The boxes were fetched in.

I am trying to tell this story without self-pride. It really was almost an automatic reaction to the pain the two colleagues were in. Automatic because of my "yet-to-be-invented" atmosphere-ometer. Now I realize we already have one.

It is not, however, our conscience. Woe betide we should go around "doing good." It is more like "heck - there has got to be another way here and change events to turn it around."

I've just realized how this relates to our bad translation of the word in the New Testament "repent." The original Greek for this word is metanoia and simply means a change of mind.

BUT, we humans don't do the changing. We see, via the pneuma - Holy Spirit -, another answer. Something moves creatively forward. Metanoia is not our work.

The pneuma is a wild, subversive, undermining, but essentially creative force.

St. John tells us about this wildness, "the Pneuma bloweth where it listeth and thou hearest the voice thereof, but knowest not where it cometh and whither it goes" (John 3:8 - R.S.V.1881).
