I thought I would look online for a book which illustrated this strange, last book in the New Testament: the Book of Revelation. As some of you know, I have sometimes been illustrating my translations as 'cartoons' and I wanted to see other people's ideas.

It was a shock to discover what was available. Only one book appeared, which related to the New Testament book. The rest - and the list went on and on and on - were illustrated books about other imagined 'apocalypses' - a word from the New Testament Greek apo-kalupto, meaning 'open up, reveal.' In the New Testament, it is translated as reveal - hence the Book of Revelation.

Do you remember the film 'Apocalypse Now'? That was a disaster movie shown to us about the Vietnam war.

What then, in St. John's imagination, was being shown, opened up to us? Why did he write such a strange book? The Book of Revelation.

He probably wrote it after 70 AD when the Temple in Jerusalem had been smashed and polluted by the Roman army. There he was, having fled to Patmos off the Turkish coast, wanting to remind all the new believers of how the Messiah (i.e., Christos, Jesus) had become the New Temple.

That seems a very strange idea, so let me explain the context. The most sacred part of the old Temple was the Holy of Holies. Only one person could go into it once a year. It was full of the darkness we have when a place is closed. But in reality, it was ablaze with light, with glory.

This word 'glory' has seriously lost its Hebrew resonances. Despite the Romantic poets' attempts to escape 18th-century rationalism by emphasizing the 'sublime', they really only associated 'glory' with natural events - like mountain-top experiences.

The older meaning of glory survives in hymns. But these references can also miss the Hebrew resonance. We make glory sound like something we humans offer, almost equivalent to praise. E.g., "Glory be to thee ---" or "Thine be the glory."

In fact, it is the reverse. It is something that comes to us. It is not ours to offer. We receive it.

So, the Apocalypse, i.e., the Book of Revelation, is a full blast of glory, opening up a vision of the 'Heavens.'

I would like to see how you depict the word revelation.