Do you find this word a problem? Yes? It is for many people as we link it up with self-righteous. But, we can't manage life without the attempt to do the right thing. We don't want to make cakes or omelettes the wrong way. Wrong equals the opposite of right. We try to fill in forms correctly or 'rightly'. Most of our education depended on getting a tick for our efforts, rather than an X. We fill in boxes on forms with a tick, indicating which is our choice of the right one. We could name many more uses for the word 'right'.

So, how does the gift of faith relate to 'getting it right'? The Older Testament is a wonderful collection of material put together by a nomadic tribal group, the Hebrews, trying to 'get it right' in God's eyes. But this dilemma took centuries to mature and come to fruition. The Newer Testament lets us peep into God's mind through Jesus' sending up of righteous, holy people - people struggling to keep the Law. He wanted us to get the joke of the very longing to 'get it right'. He knew humans rack their brains in their efforts to be seen as 'getting it right' - even to be seen by themselves in that light.

His answer was quite simple. You can't.

How, you may ask, can I say that? It is all because we miss the irony in the Gospels. Irony is the antidote to the attempt to get it right and then failing. But we are not taught that anywhere, are we? We soon turn comments into biting sarcasm and lose the open question of irony.

When you next go to London, visit the permanent exhibition in the British Library. There you can stand barely eighteen inches away from the Codex Sinaiticus, one of the earliest texts of the New Testament, written on parchment about three hundred years after Jesus' resurrection. In it, there is no punctuation at all. That was a later addition. The result of this is that nuances of a word can be missing, especially those resulting from a question mark. So the irony of Jesus gets totally lost. Try reading Jesus' words with a question mark in some of his encounters. He is saying, "It's over to you: what do you think?"

I would like to suggest that we read the Gospels with inverted commas round the word 'righteous'. It's not our job at all - to prove ourselves in the right.

So, what do we do with our lurking desire to 'get-things-right'? We need to remember that forgiveness is the only energy God emits. Forgiveness is God's ointment for our burning desire to be 'righteous', to get it right, and to fail.