I'm Henry VIII, I am, I am. Henry certainly ruled. How would one describe his rule? Cruel? Sensible? Merciless? Or perhaps blind to beauty? Witness all the ruins that Henry has knocked about a bit, stealing lead from Abbey rooftops and banning monastic orders. He certainly ruled.

The word "rule" occurs forty-six times in the New Testament, according to my Concordance, chiefly referring to the rulers of the state at that time, people with authority. So when St. Paul uses that word of marital relations, we sit up and ask questions. Is this a different sort of ruling that he is speaking about? The Greek word in the New Testament is exousia.

The R.S.V. translates 1 Corinthians ch.7 v.4 as "For the wife does not have authority over her own body, but the husband does. Likewise, the husband does not have authority over his own body, but the wife does." The word "rule" is translated in the A.V. (1611) as "power," and the N.R.S.V.(1989) has "authority" as the meaning. If we were to take these words literally, our modern world would raise a lot of objections.

Way back in 1388, Wycliffe translated this verse as "the husband yields debt to his wife and also the wife to her husband." Here, the bossiness of the three above translations gives way to fair exchange.

If we look at the Greek word used here, we come upon a very different story. My dictionary gives "freedom to exercise the inward force or faculty of power" (using the Greek word dunamis, cf. dynamite).

Power over someone? No. That's not how St. Paul is arguing. He is more concerned to answer their questions about the power of passion and to say how we can "rule" it.

So I think that the Greek word exousia used here hints at more than ruling. Paul might actually be saying, "For the wife does not have the ultimate say over her own body. It is a reciprocal process." In other words, he is describing the drama of seduction, i.e., how to engage the other to want you. Paul is then reminding them of an essential element in sexual attraction and interaction – the tease of wanting and pretending not to want. No force, just a gentle invitation...and a giving of permission. The Greek word exousia means "out ex" and "ousia" meaning being - giving yourself over to the other person.
