A rare word indeed, hardly ever used. But my father valued what the Salvation Army did for him in the First World War. It enhanced his spirits.

That simple movement of the heart has become separated from the way the words 'salvation' and 'saved' are used in some religious settings. The late Billy Graham and the whole evangelistic movement still use this word to imply someone deciding to "give their lives to God," to surrender, and as a result, belong to others who are "saved."

There's a problem here. Such a view of 'being saved' excludes those who have not yet been 'converted.' It can also diminish the beautiful faith struggles of the non-saved ones. St. Paul knew about the struggle that people have with their search for a place to belong and for others to find freedom. His answer was to trust the deep instinctive calling that only the divine can bring (1 Corinthians 7:15-17) because in God there is no blame. Blame is all we are being 'saved' from if we wish to continue to use this word 'saved.'

However, human nature lives and breathes blame. So it requires a massive leap of imagination to even begin to see what we are 'up to,' i.e., apportioning blame to others as we long to live with ourselves as "squeaky clean."

Equally, another person is undergoing the same process. Is there no escape? There is some new writing about theology that helps here. It is proposed that the word 'salvation' is used to denote an ongoing project releasing us from past fears. James Alison has written, "The salvation which Jesus was working was at the same time the fulfillment of creation........the bringing into existence and the making possible of a human living which does not know death" (Living in the End Times p. 55).

This is very close to the Hebrew origin of the word for salvation, yeshay. This word generally means living in abundance, free, and liberated.

Perhaps to appreciate that meaning, we will have to alter slightly Robert Burns's poem so that it becomes, "O would the gods the giftie gie us to see ourselves as others see us," "O would the gods the giftie gie us to see ourselves as the Creator sees us."

Safe.