Big word this. Hardly ever used now. Although we do have 'Santa' at Christmas. It is from the same Latin word as our lesser-used word 'saint'.

This 'Just One Word' is really part of three. St. Paul uses three big words in his letter to the group at Corinth: 1 Corinthians 1:30. He tells them they have had a gift of someone who was 'righteousness and sanctification and redemption' for us. Wow! What can we make of that in our age? What has happened to us that we all receive 'sanctification'? Does it mean that we are all now saints? Or do we have to try to be saintly? Ugh!

The Greek word used here is hagiasmos. It has not appeared much in our English language. We may know the great church in Istanbul is 'Hagia Sophia' meaning holy wisdom. That's about it.

So, what on earth is sanctification/holiness? Above all, it is not something that we do. In both the Old and New Testaments, it carries a huge charge. It means both danger and unutterable beauty. It comes to us. A good way to depict it in cartoons would be with a red triangle, i.e., beware! but 'something marvelous is coming.'

The holy for Hebrews was burning bright. We have to shield our eyes from it. The experience of falling in love is a clue to the power of holiness. Madonna sang 'touched for the very first time'. She was perhaps aware of the way an amorous encounter lights life up. Holiness glows. It emanates. I guess we know this when we buy Christmas lights.

But what about the danger aspect Hebrews knew about? It changes us. Who was it that sang 'I'm all shook up'? Was it Elvis? We know we have been blasted. We have been given bits of a new mind. And it is almost unspeakable-about.

There is also a sense that if we represent it, it is un-go-able-up-to. Religious buildings show this. We move from the entrance deeper into the un-go-near-able East end of the building. Hebrews knew this part was not just holy. It was the 'Holy of Holies' and un-go-into-able.

But Paul is telling us we have all been showered with holiness i.e., sanctification. The danger bit is maybe not to talk about it at all. Just to know that everyone we meet is radiant with something words can't express.