Marks mark things. Just look at how long the aisles are for buying soap powders and detergents! And how we hate smudges and blotches on our work! So we buy erasers and correction fluids.

But detectives love marks. They find clues in them, so they are problematic. There was even a psychological test in which we put ink in a fold of a piece of paper, then closed it and pressed. We called them inkblots, and others attempted to read our secret thoughts from them!

But in a school situation, the word sin... Well, we have all suffered from the trauma of a bad mark being given to our fragile attempts! Guilt and shame.

So here is a big surprise: the Greek word is as I said before, hamartia / ἁμαρτία. That's the word that King James translates as "sin" in 1611.

“Whosoever committeth sin transgresseth also the law: for sin is the transgression of the law.” (1 John 3:4)

It implies a particular view of God. It suggests that God is like us and has a tick list - that he worries when we get things wrong! And is even angry and disappointed at that. He blames us for making a black mark in our copybooks of life. That's what the translation of ἁμαρτία as "sin" has done to us. It has made that view of God dominant.

The real turn-up for new investigation and translation of the Bible is that there is no blame in or from God at all. It's just our projections. But it's been a slow discovery by the Hebrew Nation. John the Baptist twigged it almost straight away! In John's Gospel, Chapter One, he says:

"Behold, the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world!" (John 1:29)

So how, we need to ask, does Jesus do that? I'd like to suggest imagining Jesus having a rucksack on his back, which is full of our sense of self-loathing and blame. Together with the opposite, the pain of being falsely blamed. That's in our rucksack. This was Jesus's main job - God appearing in human form to carry that rucksack. Our disappointment, distress, and shame - these do not figure in God's imagination.

"Jesus takes them away" - as John the Baptist says.

They don't matter anymore when we know they don't matter to God. And then we can get at the real meaning of our need for a sense of sin. Mucking things up... It is real awe we feel at the hugeness of God and our littleness and helplessness.

That's the real sense in the word hamartia.