This word "stigma" occurs only once in the New Testament. It is used by St. Paul at the end of his letter to the group in central Turkey, i.e., Galatia (Gal 5:17). He says he is "branded on my body with the marks (stygmata) of Jesus."

Does he have an actual mark? We don't know; he could have used the Greek word "stigma" as a metaphor symbolizing what others now think of him. Also, perhaps, that he bears this mark or stigma in his heart. The word comes at the end of his letter when he has argued that neither he nor anyone else needs circumcision anymore to belong to the Messiah, the new Temple! We have another stigma.

I just want to explore how we have used this word over time.

The wounds of Jesus on the cross were later called stigmata (the word is not used there in the New Testament). Later on in history, these wounds appeared spontaneously on people, and so they were considered saints. They constantly bled, so they had to wear gloves.

We brand or stigmatize animals. No blame in this use of the word. A farmer can tell which sheep are his by branding them with dye.

Humans, over time, have used branding as a way of excluding people. Naylor, an early Quaker, was branded for dramatizing the Messiah entering Jerusalem. Much more recently in Europe, Jews had to wear their six-point star to point out their exclusion.

In the book of Genesis 4:16, Cain bore a mark for killing his brother Abel out of jealousy and rivalry.

What is Paul saying? Perhaps he bore the mark (stigma) of Jesus with quiet silent pride. The glory of the Messiah had confounded him on the Damascus road. Glory burns. Perhaps he was emphasizing the sheer utter freedom of being 'marked' by Christ.

But perhaps there is even more in this word "stigma." One of its early uses was as a punctuation mark: a full stop. When we finish a piece of writing, we finally press the 'full stop' key with relief and satisfaction. Jesus' last words on the cross were 'it is over,' i.e., a full stop. To what? To our fear of "not pleasing God and recognizing our faults." So, these words mark the strange task of resting in the endless beauty of God's opinion of us. We are all stigmatized with Glory.