Some years after World War 2 sweets “came off ration”. I remember going to Wakefield market and wondering what I could buy of the sweets now covering the whole stall. Which to go for? That predicament is a help in translating the New Testament word ‘TEMPTATION’. First of all, temptation is not bad in itself; the problem is in the nature of the desire inspiring it. This we need to look at. The Greek word for TEMPTATION. Is periasmos and its basic meaning is to try or attempt something; i.e. we have a choice. I am trying to de-mythologise the drama we all have going on in our minds – Shall I? Shan’t I? Because there is an accompanying drama – “Did I make the right choice? Oh heck! Will I have to suffer the consequences?” Big dramatic words, these ‘suffer’ and ‘consequence’. But all this is played out as a pivotal drama. We are largely unaware that we are actors in a drama. So, how does the New Testament help us? Surely the whole bible is replete with moments of right and wrong choices? Yes. Torah, i.e. the Law of the Hebrew nation gave this drama serious questions. We have the forceful guidelines of the ten commandments (Exodus ch.20, Leviticus ch.19, Deuteronomy ch.4) where the very sensitive Hebrew nation posited God talking in accordance with rules of do and don’t e.g. “Thou shalt not …..” We live in a world of guilt. However, with the filling out and blessing of Torah by Jesus, he insisted there is a third voice within our internal decision making – God’s. Thus we can rest easy. Here is what Paul said to the people of Corinth (1 Corinthians 10:13) “No temptation has overtaken you that is not common to man (i.e. we are all in this dilemma. Your state is no worse than anyone else’s) God is faithful (i.e. Believes in you) He will not let you be periasmoed beyond your strength, but will provide the way of escape.”

Oh! How we rush to answer a dilemma and get our reaction voiced. But, Paul has seen the new order of an incarnate (i.e. human) Good, so that we can be patient, wait and rest for the decision to respond being given to us by the transcendent divine being in us all. TEMPTATION then is an opportunity to await a moment of freedom akin to glory.