"We never have enough time." We often say this without realizing that time is not a thing we can obtain; it simply exists. However, you may argue that we buy clocks and watches to keep track of time as if we can grasp it and then obey it. "Be on the dot, OK?" But what dot are we referring to? I don't know how to answer that unless it is the mark on a sundial which the sun makes. I had thought that was a line or an angle.

We are used to hearing the words from the Book of Ecclesiastes read at funerals:
"There is a time for everything,
and a season for every activity under the heavens." - Ecclesiastes 3:1

And on it goes for eight verses containing the phrase 'A time for' twenty-eight times. It sounds so clear, describing how life goes. But then in the same chapter, verse 11 warns us: "He has made everything beautiful in its time. He has also set eternity in the human heart; yet no one can fathom what God has done from beginning to end." Here, we are told that with the divine, we can't begin to 'get it' - i.e. time.

"We can grasp neither the beginning nor the end of what God does." - Ecclesiastes 3:11

Then in verse 15, we find time turned upside down. "What has been will be again, what has been done will be done again; there is nothing new under the sun."

So how is time seen in the New Testament? We have some words in the Gospel of John that can help us here. He suggests that there are two sorts of time. In John 7:6, Jesus says, "My time has not yet come, but your time is always here." What then is divine time? How is it different from ordinary time (your time) mentioned here?

Einstein knew that time is not a thing. It can't be counted. But time as our invention can. We need to know when to meet a friend. We forget how time was located differently throughout the world until Greenwich mean time became the standard everywhere. So, time as a non-existent, untouchable, ungraspable thing has yet to be imagined, but St. John gives us a clue in those words of Jesus.

It is our task to 'Einstein-ize' our imaginations to see that there is something beyond space, time, and motion - things we think we can measure. And this 'something' is marvelous. Even more marvelous to know it was once embodied in Palestine. People encountered both time and no-time in Jesus of Nazareth.

In the beginning of the strange Book of Revelation, Jesus says, "Grace and peace to you from him who is, and who was, and who is to come..." - Revelation 1:4