The word WHEN is an Old English word, as are all the others beginning with WH. Rudyard Kipling said, "I keep six honest serving men; They taught me all I knew; Their names are WHAT and WHY and WHEN; And HOW and WHERE and WHO." Only one without 'wh,' and they are all questions.

But I am writing this to explore another use of the word WHEN. Instead of puzzlement about the time something has happened or will happen, I want to suggest that it is a word indicating a moment of time now, that has been opened up when something came over me. The word WHEN can thus point to a movement of our minds when an inkling was received. Something has been given to us.

The Hebrew word holds this meaning. It is be-yom and means 'on the day when.'

There was this great thinker in Denmark called Kierkegaard. All his life he struggled with the thinking of Europe in the C19th that wanted pure elevated inspiration; e.g., "we rise to it, lift our minds beyond normal life." No, says Kierkegaard. Some of his thoughts have been summarized in an article by George Pattison (Theology 1984). "Human existence, he argued, always encounters reality not as its own creation, but as a gift and a task. This implies engaging with the suffering life inflicts" (p. 9). Then on p.12 he spells out the implications. "Kierkegaard's counsel to those who experience the split between the word and the thing is to live the experience of division through to its bitter conclusion, to face the horror of 'sin' in silent wonder, to undergo the total reconstruction of selfhood which always transcends the specificity of word and image." He knew that we have divided minds, but we await the day (yom) when unity takes place.

Perhaps Humpty Dumpty is a model for us all;
Humpty Dumpty sat on a wall
All at once (when?) he had a great fall.
All the King's horses and all the King's men
Couldn't put Humpty together again.

We are all broken eggshells - but - broken in order to give birth as fertilized eggs do. Love enters an empty, broken, and divided heart. And it is given by other people who can crack the shell when the gift of the day (yom) appears.

