Is this the one word that 'sticks in our craw'? Is it this one - the word 'WILL' of God?
Were you to write down all the words associated with the word 'will' related to a person's feelings, what would you put?
My guess is that it would be: subordination to someone: trying to please someone who has power over us: obedience.
All of these involve fear. Perhaps there's more that explains the underlying fear. Fear of not belonging: fear of not receiving a favourable regard - a tick of approval.
It is serious stuff being beholden to someone else's will.
Why did we love Laurel and Hardy so much? Is it because they appeared to break down these conventions? "Another fine mess you've got me into." Said with no blame and thus evoking our sympathy and fellow feeling. We laugh with them knowing life isn't quite like that, but wishing it was.
The Greek word, translated as 'will' through six hundred years of translating the Bible into English is thelema and I would like to suggest its meaning is nearer to 'desire' than 'will'.
This makes a massive difference if we use the word 'desire' instead of 'will'. It makes a difference as to how we imagine the Divine and the desire emanating from it.
Divine desire isn't 'iffy'. It does not wobble or vacillate. It does not have black moods.
It can't alter if it is only Love. (I have put a capital letter to remind us of the heights and depths of divine love.)
Divine desire is patient and kind so that we are not engulfed by its overflowing. Instead we are made more, we are expanded. (Have a look at St. John's big talk in his gospel ch14 -17 where we are caught up in the dance of glory).
Its overflowing enlarges us, freeing us from our fearful self.
Divine desire is in time and ahead of time. - This is the big mystery. The voice of divine desire says "Come with me and then you will desire as I desire".
These are just five implications of a translation of thelema as desire. I hope we can see that it is our fearful self that has translated it as 'will' and that 'desire' offers a radical freedom of the imagination.